

EWMBA 207
Ethics and Responsible Business Leadership
Course Syllabus 




SPRING 2026










Professor: Jonathan Weigel
E-mail: jweigel@berkeley.edu 
Office: F594


GSI:  Sarah Martin
Email: sarah_martin@berkeley.edu 


Faculty Assistant: Kristie Dinh
Email: kristiedinh@berkeley.edu






COURSE OVERVIEW AND OBJECTIVES

Course overview

Ethical problems are pervasive in business. Most important decisions transcend standard business calculus. Is it acceptable to outsource production to countries  with  lower  labor  standards?  Should  tech  companies  share  data  with nondemocratic regimes? Is it acceptable to pay facilitation payments for market access if competitors do so? Navigating these ethical challenges in an ever changing global environment is crucial for the success of today’s organizations. 

Objectives

The objective of this course is to help you develop a robust position on such difficult problems. The course will provide training structured as follows:

A Framework: We will develop a rigorous intellectual framework for the analysis of values. This will provide structure, and skills for pattern recognition, that can be applied to anticipate and evaluate moral risks.

Cases and exercises: These will help you feel and work through the dilemmas underlying common ethical problems.

Debates: The class will emphasize discussion. Whatever your views, this is a safe space for diverse opinions. Share them! 

Why does business ethics matter? Values are at the core of personal and organizational identity. Thus, values shape culture and, ultimately, performance. Different material, psychological, and cultural processes govern the value performance of organizations. These processes pose challenges for managers. Engaging with those challenges, while anticipating stakeholder responses, is crucial for good leadership.

Develop moral clarity and character. While conceptual clarity does not guarantee character, courageous decision-making is difficult without clarity. Sound decisions require the ability to take a stance and to offer an articulate, coherent justification for one's decisions. The course provides tools to do just that. Upon that basis, it becomes easier to identify the character traits one ought to cultivate. The combination of a clear moral vision and the right character are the surest path to making a positive difference. 
GRADING
The final grade will be determined according according to the Haas grading policy and as a function of the following dimensions:

Unstructured Course Contribution			 30%

Structured Course Contribution (Class quizzes)	 10%

Midterm Exam					 25%

Final Exam   			             		 35%


Unstructured Course Contribution

Class Participation and Attendance Policy

The participation grade is composed of three components: 
Instructor assessment (15%). Participation is assessed both on quantity and quality. Participation is reviewed after each class and added to your running total. This will be a function of the number of times you contribute and more importantly the quality of those contributions. See below on quality.
Assignments (10%). Assignments 1b and 5 count toward this portion of the participation grade.
Peer-rated (5%). To recognize the contribution of those who do more behind the scenes by helping others outside of class, contributing to group projects, etc, we conduct a 360 review at the end of class. 
 
How can you increase the quality of your contributions?

Offering a relevant perspective, in a way that is accurate, logically consistent, and pertinent to the stage of the discussion

Applying the concepts offered in the readings and lectures

Seeing connections, parallels, and contrasts across cases or situations

Moving the discussion forward by building on previous contributions with new insights; repeating points already made by others does not add as much value (occasionally, seconding someone else’s argument in a debate can be informative)

Turning vague ideas into precise statements

Asking good questions

Participating in iClicker polls

Structured Course Contribution - Short quizzes

We will have a series of short iClicker pop quizzes in class, about cases and concepts. These questions will be directly related to the required class reading. 

Attendance policy

The EWMBA program office requires us to have a strict attendance policy. Absences will be recorded as zeros for structured and unstructured contribution grades for the session. Missing more than one session will require a student to withdraw from the course. Exceptions will only be made in the rarest of circumstances by the program office. 

Generative AI policy

This course prioritizes active engagement, critical thinking, and learning. Our aim is to cultivate an environment where your creativity, originality, and problem-solving skills flourish. You may use AI tools to improve your learning. AI tools or automated services, however, are prohibited during class sessions and for in-class assignments (e.g., mid-term and final exam). This includes but is not limited to, AI-generated content, automated writing assistance, and machine learning-based solutions.

More generally, the unique approach we develop in this class means that off-the-shelf generative AI tools tend to not deliver the best answers. We check AI-generated answers to essay prompts when evaluating student work, and these consistently return poor results that reflect more generic treatment of ethical theories than our course approach.


iClicker Cloud - Set Up 

We will be using iClicker Cloud to assess understanding and participation. Do not purchase the iClicker Student App. UC Berkeley has a site license and you will use it for free
Create an iClicker Student account


Email: use your official @berkeley.edu account


ID: use your UID (find it on your CalCentral profile) not your SID/Student ID 


If you complete these steps correctly you will be added to the course automatically


Please complete these steps before the first class
If you need more specific instructions please consult the “iClicker Instructions” on bCourses.

Individual Assignments

Assignment 1a, 1b, and 5 contribute to self-discovery and contribute to your participation grade. Assignments 2-4 will be done as practice quizzes in bCourses. While ungraded and not strictly required, these assignments are strongly recommended for best results. After you complete them, you will have the chance to benchmark your answers against suggested model answers.   

Detailed instructions for each assignment will be distributed via bCourses.

Assignment 1a – Opinion survey: optional 

Due: midnight before class 1

Assignment 1b – My experience: contributes to participation grade.

Due: midnight before class 1

Assignment 2 – Google’s Dragonfly: optional 

Due: midnight before class 3

Assignment 3 – Inclusive Organizations: optional

Due: midnight before class 3
 
Assignment 4 – My experience revisited: contributes to participation grade. 

Due: midnight before class 5. 

Assignment 5 – Sustainable Supply Chains: optional.

Due: midnight before class 6.

Mid-Term and Final Exam

Mid-term exam: during first half of class 3

Final exam: during class 6, i.e., May 4 (Blue), May 5 (Gold), 6pm in N370. 

Both the mid-term and final exam will be available for download in bCourses on the exam day at 6:00pm.  Answers must be submitted within the allotted time,  also via bCourses. The exam will test your understanding of the relevant ethical frameworks and concepts discussed in class. Exams are open-notes and individual. This means you cannot communicate with classmates directly or indirectly about the exam for the entire period of the exam. Please make sure you bring a laptop in order to access the exam in the classroom.

It is your responsibility to be present and online to view the exam and submit your answers within the allotted window. The electronic format does not mean we can alter the date/times to suit individual schedules. Exceptions will only be made based on grave situations (e.g., illness, family tragedies). 

Such exceptions will require the use of remote proctoring software (e.g., Honorlock).  Honorlock monitors online exams using a combination of AI and live proctors, recording your webcam, screen, and audio, and flagging suspicious activities like another person in the room, accessing other devices, or unusual sounds (e.g., keywords for cheating) for instructor review, with proctors potentially intervening via chat for assessment and to ensure fair testing conditions, all while the instructor makes the final decision on academic misconduct..Proctor pop-ins can also be triggered by interruptions, excessive movements or stretch breaks, visiting unapproved internet sites, etc. If there is a no-fault error during the exam (e.g, accidental disruption by a pet or child, internet disruption), verbally inform your proctor and instructors immediately during the recording so that it is captured for their review. Recorded sessions are stored for a minimum of 12 months and potentially longer in the event that the session is required for further review by Student Conduct. Data collected during the exam session, including the video recording may be used at UC Berkeley solely for the purpose of verifying test environment integrity. For more information, review the Honorlock Exam Taker Privacy Notice. Please make sure that your computer meets the requirements; you must preinstall the Honorlock Chrome extension on the Google Chrome browser. You may be required to establish your identity by presenting a photo ID (Cal 1 Card). If you require accommodation because you are unable to use Honorlock, please let us know as soon as possible so we can refer you to an appropriate workaround (e.g., proctoring exams through DSP).

COURSE HOURS AND LOCATIONS
Classes

Section 1B Blue – Monday 6-9:30pm, N370 (Chou Hall)
Section 2B Gold – Tuesday 6-9:30pm, N370 (Chou Hall)

Office hours

Sarah Martin (GSI) review session / office hours: Sundays 5:00 - 6:30 pm PT via Zoom (https://berkeley.zoom.us/j/9725314266)

Jonathan Weigel - by appointment (jweigel@berkeley.edu)

The bCourses discussion board is available for you to post and answer questions in a way that benefits everyone. Be sure to post course-related questions on bCourses, rather than emailing the GSIs, so that other students who may have the same questions can also benefit from seeing the answers. Your GSI will monitor and reply to questions within a day. We will be logging in every 2-3 days, so if you want to bring some specific question to our attention, tag us and we will address it within 24 hours.

IV. SESSIONS, READINGS, AND PREPARATION GUIDELINES


Class 1: Beyond yourself? Principles of moral architecture

Case material (required readings in *)


Dal Bó and Xu / How did a $9 Billion Health Tech Startup End up DOA? *


Griffith / The Ugly Unethical Underside of Silicon Valley *


Zimbardo / The Psychology of Power: To the Person? To the Situation? To the System? *


The Inventor: Out For Blood In Silicon Valley (2019)  - HBO Documentary


Asher-Schapiro / What the Theranos Documentary Misses

Preparation guidelines

Are there limits to self-interest as a principle on which to run organizations/society? What might those limits be?


Can you highlight structural and psychological factors behind the Theranos downfall? In other words, if you had run that company, what different rules might you have imposed, and what behaviors/temptations would you have tried to guard against?


Can you think of parallels to other corporate scandals? What are the similarities and differences in terms of structural and psychological factors? 


Would values that depart from self-interest help avoid Theranos-like cases? What alternative values would you propose? What are your non-negotiables?  


Class 2: Welfare v. Duty: Utilitarian and Deontological Perspectives on Ethics

Case material (required readings in *)


Smith and Crawford: Ziqitza Health Care Limited: Responding to Corruption * 


Vaccaro / Raunchy emails, too much drinking, and dirty dancing (note: only last two cases discussed in class, the first (Raunchy emails) is left as homework assignment) *


For Assignment 2, and GSI Section Discussion: Dal Bó and Xu / Google's Dragonfly: The Ethics of Providing a Censored Search Engine in China 

Conceptual material (required readings in *)


Velasquez / Utilitarianism (60-71) *


Marcus and Kaiser / Deontological Ethics – Rights and Duties *


Le Guin / The ones who walk away from Omelas *


O’Neill / A Simplified Account of Kant’s Ethics Awad et. al. (2018) / The Moral Machine Experiment 


Preparation guidelines


How would a utilitarian evaluate the dilemma facing Ziqitza leadership?


A famous saying goes, “When in Rome, do as the Romans do.” Then - should you always play by prevailing local rules? Could the conclusion depend on the type of utilitarian framework you use (Act vs. Rule Utilitarian)?  

Is it right to sacrifice the individual for the collective? Always, sometimes, or never?

Do businesses have a responsibility to create an inclusive work environment? What if this does not maximize welfare, or profits?

Should romantic relationships among members of the same organization be forbidden? Why or why not?


Class 3: Mid-term Exam and Theories of Justice 

Conceptual material (required readings in *) - for second half of class


Excerpts from Sandel (Justice, Chapter 6 - The case for equality )*

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy / Justice as Entitlements (First paragraph, c. Distributive Justice)*


Preparation guidelines


Is justice primarily about processes or about outcomes?
 
Whose property rights are at stake in the debate over training generative AI models and IP?


Who is the relevant “worst off” party to consider when applying the maximin criterion?


Would an act and rule utilitarian agree or disagree about the ethics of training generative AI models without licensing agreements in place?  


Class 4: Integrative Class - Environmental Justice and the Ethics of Training Generative AI Models

Case material (required readings in *)

Weigel and Xu, “Cap-and-Trade Meets Environmental Justice in Richmond, CA” *


Fears and Dennis / This is environmental racism – How a protest in a North Carolina farming town sparked a national movement


The Economist / Environmental Justice in the Balance – the case of pursuing civil rights and climate policy in tandem has been oversold

Dal Bó, Weigel, and Xu / “The Ethics of Training Generative AI Models.” *

The Economist / “Generative AI is a marvel. Is it also built on theft?” 

Menand /  “Is A.I. the Death of I.P.?”, The New Yorker 


Preparation guidelines


What are the motives of opponents/proponents of market mechanisms to resolve environmental challenges? Do their claims have a rigorous ethical defense?


Are market-based mechanisms discriminatory? Are they fair?


Assess the fairness of the pollution credits trading system. Would your assessment differ if you lived in a hotspot?


Whose property rights are at stake in the debate over training generative AI models and IP?

Would an act and rule utilitarian agree or disagree about the ethics of training generative AI models without licensing agreements in place?  



Class 5: Corporate Social Responsibility and Gene Editing

Conceptual reading (required readings in *)
Friedman / The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits * 
Dal Bó and Lyons / Corporate Responsibility and The Two Minds of Milton Friedman

Case material (required readings in *)
Dal Bó, Weigel and Xu, “CRISPR and The Selfish Gene Editor”, 2021 (direct link in bCourses) *


Conceptual reading (required readings in *)

Pinker / The Moral Instinct *

Detert / Managing yourself: Cultivating everyday courage *

Fisher / Dimmock: Aristotelian Virtue Ethics - Introduction

Haidt / The New Synthesis in Moral Psychology


Preparation guidelines


Should firms do everything they can to “do good,” only certain things, or none?


Do shareholders own firms, and should managers maximize share value?


Do you think CSR can be defined meaningfully beyond legal compliance? If so, what would be a good definition? 


Consider the situation from Dr. He’s position. What paths of action are available? What are the individual risks and rewards involved?


Would a virtuous choice involve other considerations? Which?


Who are the relevant actors, and what are the stakes involved in pursuing gene editing? 

Class 6: Final Exam.


Additional reading material

Some students ask for additional reading material to expand their knowledge beyond what was covered in class. The following list is just indicative of a few interesting books to get started, and not in any way systematic or exhaustive. 

Appiah, Kwame Anthony (2005) The Ethics of Identity, Princeton University Press.


Blackburn, Simon (2001) Ethics: A very short introduction. Oxford University Press. Short, to the point. Leaves you wanting more.


Korsgaard, Christine (1996) Creating the kingdom of ends. Cambridge University Press. Authoritative work on Kantian ethics.


Nagel, Thomas (1987) What does it all mean? A very short introduction to philosophy. Oxford University press.


O’Neill, Onora (1975) Acting on Principle, Columbia University Press


Sandel, Michael (2009) Justice. What’s the right thing to do? Farrar, Straus and Giroux. This is the book from which we drew in some of the classes. The entire book is clear and fun to read.


Sandel, Michael (2012) What money can’t buy. The moral limits of markets. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. An exploration of the ethical difficulties behind many types of transactions. 


Singer, Peter (1980) Practical Ethics. Cambridge University Press.

